Hi, my name is Brian Caffo and
this is the lecture on Bias as part of our
executive data science specialization.
I want to distinguish the kind of bias
that I'm talking about today with
some of the other things that we've
talked about before, like randomization.
The goal of randomization is to
make the two groups that we're
studying as comparable as possible.
So if we randomize a treatment and
a control to a collection of subjects,
then they're otherwise
similar other than whether or
not they receive the treatment or
control, with high probability at least.
That doesn't mean necessarily
that the collection of
patients that you're
studying are representative
of the broader collection of patients
that you'd like to draw conclusions on.
For example, patients in clinic
trials often are very good at
adhering to their medications where as
the general population may be less so.
This, of course, carries over to
discussion of thinks like AB-Testing.
So why is this relevant?
Well it's relevant because
statistical inference,
kind of the fundamental
component of statistics,
is the process of making conclusions
about a population from our sample.
It's not enough to just say
things about our sample.
We actually want to generalize that
knowledge beyond our sample and
that is the process of
statistical inference.
Well, if our sample isn't representative
of the population that we'd like to draw
inferences on, then we have a problem.
And things can happen like this.
When the Chicago Tribune declared
that Dewey defeated Truman,
when in fact Truman won the election.
The root cause in this case was a kind
of bizarre sampling scheme that
led to an erroneous conclusion.
Another famous example is
the so-called Kinsey Report.
In the Kinsey Report, the collection of
study subjects involved a lot of people
with psychological disorders and
prisoners.
And then the main criticism of the work
was that it wasn't generalizable
beyond this somewhat different
population that it was studying.
It's interesting to note that Kinsey's
response was to collect more subjects, but
again, not representative subjects.
And this of course doesn't
solve the problem.
Simply getting a greater end of a biased
sample doesn't correct the bias.
In fact, in a sense, it makes it worse.
So what can you do?
And that's what we're
gonna talk about today.
Different strategies for handling bias.
Well, I could think of three.
So, how do we combat sampling and
other forms of bias?
Well, one of the best ones is random
sampling, here's a picture of an urn.
Urn problems are sort of famous
in statistics for sampling.
So, random sampling is exactly that,
we try to draw subjects randomly from
the population that we're interested in.
This can often be quite hard to do.
For example, in polling, there's an entire
science devoted to getting accurate polls
and getting your sample random so
that they don't have inherent biases and
they don't make
a Chicago Tribune style mistake.
One, for example,
one strategy often used is random dialing,
random telephone dialing for example.
But, none the less, this is a good
strategy if you can do it, but
often you can't,
often it's not on the table.
What are some other strategies?
Well, waiting is another strategy when
again, random sampling is off the table.
The idea of waiting is
something like this,
imagine in your sample you have
twice as many men as you have women.
However, you know in the population
that you're interested in drawing
inferences about,
there's equal numbers of men and women.
In your sample then when you
were doing your analysis,
you would upweight the collection
of women that you had and
you would down weight
the collection of men.
So that as far as the weighted
inferences were concerned,
the women and
men were contributing equally, okay?
So that's the process of weighting.
Again, this requires that you know the
population demographics through respect to
these important characteristics and that
you have them measured in your sample.
Finally, the last strategy that I think
of, one the important three strategies for
dealing with bias, is modeling.
In our modeling case, what we would
say is we would want to understand
why it is that on whatever we were
measuring, gender made a difference.
And we would try to model that and
account for it and
then use our statistical
model to adjust for it.
This has the problem of actually
having to build the model and
whether or not our conclusions
are robust to this model building.
Things like having a random sample
are quite robust to a lot of assumptions
whereas modeling can often be fraught
with errors associated with assumption.
So again, those are three strategies
that you can use to combat bias.
So let me summarize.
So bias comes in many forms and
can contaminate your analysis,
especially your statistical inferences.
Sampling in bias,
which we talked a lot about today,
is a particularly common one whereby
your sample isn't indicative
of the population you'd like
to make inferences is about.
We talked about three strategies for
combatting sampling bias.
One was random sampling,
that's at the design stage, and may or
may not be applicable in your case.
We talked about reweighting, okay?
That's done in the analysis stage but
requires you to have specific
knowledge about the weights.
And then there's modeling, which, again,
is done at the analysis stage, however,
requires the model building exercise and
may or may not be
sensitive to some of those choices
that you make in building the model.
Well, I hope you found
this lecture useful, and
I look forward to seeing
you in the next class.